add crud tables docs (#2066)
agriculturegovau/agds-next: docs/content/patterns/crud-data-tables/index.mdx

---
title: Create, read, update and delete data in tables
description: Applications that require persistent data storage commonly require table layouts to present stored data. Here are some patterns that enable users to create, read, update and delete persistent data in tables.
relatedComponents:
  ['button', 'file-input', 'file-upload', 'section-alert', 'table']
---

## Overview

Use CRUD table interactions to help users to Create, Read, Update or Delete (CRUD) data presented in tables. These common interactions can be achieved by providing an additional drawer or subpage surface for the action, to reduce the length and complexity of the form page and to provide the user content that is relevant to the interaction through progressive disclosure.

### Create a record in a data table

> When creating a record to a data table is the primary action of the page, provide a primary button immediately before the table so it is above the table in the reading order and page hierarchy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding a record to a data table is the primary action of the page, provide a primary button immediately before the table so it is above the table in the reading order and page hierarchy.
```

Reviewer: I'd also say "so it is above the table in the reading order and page hierarchy" is unnecessary

Reviewer 2: I have intentionally changed the language to align with the acronym CRUD C = create. Please maintain the CRUD acronym language throughout

Reviewer: I thought that, but the one below had "adding" instead if creating. "Creating a record to a table" reads really strangely though.

Reviewer 2: we need to reference the position on the page if you dont think the hierarchy is required

Reviewer: The hierarchy and placement is good, it's just the start to the paragraph, "When creating a record to a data table". You can't create to something

> When adding a record to a data table is a secondary or supplementary action of the page provide a small secondary action immediately after the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding a record to a data table is a secondary or supplementary action of the page, provide a small secondary action immediately after the table.
```

> When creating a record to a data table is the primary action of the page, provide a primary button immediately before the table so it is above the table in the reading order and page hierarchy.
> 
> When adding a record to a data table is a secondary or supplementary action of the page, provide a small secondary action immediately after the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the primary action for a page it to create and add a record to a data table, provide an appropriate, primary button immediately before the table so it is above the table in the reading order and page hierarchy.

When creating a record is a secondary or supplementary action of the page, provide a small, secondary button immediately after the table.
```

Before any records have been added to a data table provide an empty state to inform users there are no available records.

```jsx live
<Stack gap={3}>
	<Stack gap={1.5}>
		<H1>
			<Text
				color="muted"
				display="block"
				fontSize="sm"
				fontWeight="bold"
				lineHeight="heading"
			>
				Form title
			</Text>
			Create a record in this data table
		</H1>
		<Text as="p" color="muted" fontSize="md">
			Add other equipment
		</Text>
	</Stack>
	<Stack gap={2} alignItems="flex-start">
		<H2>Table of persistent data records</H2>
		<Stack gap={1}>
			<InfoIcon size="lg" />
			<Heading type="h2" fontSize="lg">
				No records added
			</Heading>
			<Text>You must add an equipment to proceed.</Text>
		</Stack>
		<ButtonGroup>
			<Button variant="secondary" size="sm" iconBefore={PlusIcon}>
				Add record
			</Button>
		</ButtonGroup>
	</Stack>
</Stack>
```

> In most situations use a side drawer or side page to provide all form inputs and controls required to add a new record. Use [drawer](/components/drawer) when the form is small or side pages for longer forms that a user will need to scroll.

Reviewer: This is clearer
```suggestion
In most situations, use a side drawer or side page containing all of the form inputs and controls necessary to add a new record. Use [drawer](/components/drawer) when the form is small or side pages for longer or more complex forms.
```

Reviewer 2: scroll is the main reason to choose a page over a side drawer - please do not remove the scroll reference

Author: Updated except for `scroll` at end in [774afe](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/2066/commits/774afed53bbe5e8a351a68c8fdba4b7748df8b7f)

<ImageWithBorder
	alt="Screenshot of an open side drawer with the title ‘Add record’ and an empty state short form with text input, radio buttons, a Select component and form buttons ‘Add record’ and ‘Cancel’"
	src="/img/patterns/crud-tables-create-record.png"
/>

> Once the form used for adding a record to the table is completed, return the user to the table page and display the new record as a row in the table. Show a section alert immediately above the table to show success. Focus the Section alert so the change is announced to screen reader users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the form used for adding a record to the table is completed, return the user to the table page and display the new record as a row in the table. Show a [section alert](/components/section-alert) immediately above the table to show success. Focus the section alert so the change is announced to screen reader users.
```

								ABC123456
							</TextLink>
						</TableCell>
						<TableCell>Type 1</TableCell>
						<TableCell>123 Address, State</TableCell>
						<TableCell>
							<Flex gap={1}>
								<TextLink aria-describedby="ABC123456" href="#">
									Edit
								</TextLink>
								<TextLink aria-describedby="ABC123456" href="#">
									Delete
								</TextLink>
							</Flex>
						</TableCell>
					</TableRow>
				</TableBody>
			</Table>
		</TableWrapper>
		<ButtonGroup>
			<Button variant="secondary" size="sm" iconBefore={PlusIcon}>
				Add record
			</Button>
		</ButtonGroup>
	</Stack>
</Stack>
```

### Read a record in a data table

Provide a link in the first column of the table so users can open and read a record. The record number or other unique identifier should be made bold and used for the link label.

Provide a side drawer or side page to provide the record information. Use side drawers for small records or side pages for longer records that a user will need to scroll.

After a user has read the record return them to the table page.

Reading a record in a table is repeatable and scalable pattern.

### Update a record in a data table

> Provide an ‘Edit’ link in the last column of the table so users can open and update or edit existing records. The edit link can be included in a drop down of actions in the last column if there are more than two actions required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide an ‘Edit’ link or button in the last column of the table so users can open and update or edit existing records. If more than two actions can be formed on a record, put them within an ‘Actions’ [dropdown menu](/components/dropdown-menu) instead.
```

Reviewer 2: If more than two actions area available on a row - I'm unsure what formed means

Reviewer: "performed", sorry

> Editing content in place in semantic tables is difficult for some users, so use a side page or side drawer to provide all inputs and controls required to edit the record. When a user elects to edit a record open the side drawer or side page and show the populated fields to be edited.

Reviewer 2: good

> After the record is edited in the side page or drawer, return the user to the table page, show the edited record in the table, and provide a Section alert immediately above the table to show success. Focus the Section alert so the change is announced to screen reader users.

Author: Updated in [b7c9b6](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/2066/commits/b7c9b616671fdccf28b88c7291ff3dac1b5262b8)

The update or edit pattern is repeatable and scalable.

<ImageWithBorder

> 	alt="Screenshot of an open side drawer with the title ‘Add record’ and a populated short form with text input, radio buttons, a Select component and form buttons ‘Add record’ and ‘Cancel’"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	alt="Screenshot of an open side drawer with the title ‘Add record’ and a populated short form with text input, radio buttons, a select component and form buttons: ‘Add record’ and ‘Cancel’"
```

	src="/img/patterns/crud-tables-edit-record.png"
/>

### Delete a record from a data table

Provide a ’Delete’ link in the last column of the table so users can delete existing records. The delete link can be included in a drop down of actions in the last column if there are more than two actions required.

> If the table supports batch actions more than one record can be deleted at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the table supports batch actions, more than one record can be deleted at the same time.
```

> Before any record is deleted provide a destructive action modal to make sure a user intends to remove the record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before any record is deleted provide, a destructive action [modal](/components/modal) to make sure a user purposely intends to remove the record.
```

After the record is deleted, remove the record from the table, and provide a Section alert immediately above the table to show success. Focus the Section alert so the change is announced to screen reader users.

The delete pattern is repeatable and scalable.

<ImageWithBorder

> 	alt="Screenshot of an open Modal dialog with the title ‘Are you sure you want to remove this record’ and description ‘It will be removed immediately. You can't undo this action.’"

Reviewer: I think the image should be updated accordingly
```suggestion
	alt="Screenshot of an open Modal dialog with the title ‘Are you sure you want to delete this record?’ and description ‘It will be deleted immediately. You can't undo this action.’"
```

	src="/img/patterns/crud-tables-delete-record.png"
/>

> ## Upload an undefined list of files to a table

Author: It's definitely sounds like we created a bug, `unspecified` works well

> ## Upload an undefined list of files to a table

Author: Updated to `unspecified` in [b7c9b6](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/2066/commits/b7c9b616671fdccf28b88c7291ff3dac1b5262b8)

Use a repeatable file upload pattern when uploading an undefined list of files of different categories or when specific metadata for each file is required. Metadata can be associated with uploaded files when using this pattern to support back stage processing.

> The upload undefined list of files pattern reduces the amount of form content on the parent page making it easier for users to complete the form, and keeps the users context and focus when providing all required metadata in the side drawer or subpage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upload undefined list of files pattern reduces the amount of form content on the parent page making it easier for users to complete the form, and keeps the user’s context and focus when providing all required metadata in the side drawer or subpage.
```

### Empty state

> Before any files are uploaded provide an empty state. Use a standard empty state rather than an empty table because the experience of the empty state will be better for screen reader users. They will not need to navigate through a table to find out it is empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before any files are uploaded, provide an empty state. Use a standard empty state rather than an empty table because the experience of the empty state is simpler for many users. Screen reader users will not need to navigate through a table to find out it is empty.
```

		<H2>List of equipment</H2>
		<Stack gap={1}>
			<InfoIcon size="lg" />
			<Heading type="h2" fontSize="lg">
				No equipment added
			</Heading>
			<Text>You must add an equipment to proceed.</Text>
		</Stack>
		<ButtonGroup>
			<Button variant="secondary" size="sm" iconBefore={PlusIcon}>
				Upload file
			</Button>
		</ButtonGroup>
	</Stack>
</Stack>
```

### Side page or drawer

The pattern will direct the user to a subpage or side drawer to compete each upload task. The choice of subpage or drawer will be determined by the amount of content, inputs and controls required. We do not encourage side drawers that scroll, so use side pages for longer upload form pages. Try to choose one option, either side drawer or side page, that can be implemented consistently across the multi-page form or service it is used in.

Metadata for each uploaded file can be provided in a side drawer or side page containing the required inputs and controls. This pattern reduces the amount of form content on the parent page making it easier for users to complete the form. It keeps the users context and focus when providing all required metadata in the side drawer or side page.

### File categorisation

> The use of a subpage or drawer enables you to insert questions and fields specific to each file upload to define the record category or type and provide any additional information required about an upload. Radio groups or Selects can be used to help the user determine which category should be applied to an uploaded file.

Reviewer: This is very wordy and hard to parse imo
```suggestion
The use of a subpage or drawer enables you to insert questions and fields specific to each file upload to define the record category or type, and provide any additional information required about an upload. Radio groups or selects can be used to help the user determine which category should be applied to an uploaded file.
```

<ImageWithBorder
	alt="Screenshot of an open side drawer with the title ‘Upload file’ and an empty state short form with text input, radio buttons, text input, a Select, File upload and form buttons ‘Upload file’ and ‘Cancel’"
	src="/img/patterns/crud-tables-upload-undefined-list.png"
/>

### Validation and focus

> When a file is added in a subpage or drawer, return the user to the parent form page, set their focus on a Section alert to inform them if the upload was successful or an error has occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a file is added in a subpage or drawer, return the user to the parent page and set their focus on a section alert to inform them if the upload was successful or an error has occurred.
```

> When a file is added in a subpage or drawer, return the user to the parent form page, set their focus on a Section alert to inform them if the upload was successful or an error has occurred.

Reviewer 2: this is good

						<TableHeader scope="col">Item</TableHeader>
						<TableHeader scope="col">Qty</TableHeader>
						<TableHeader scope="col">Files</TableHeader>
						<TableHeader scope="col">Actions</TableHeader>
					</TableRow>
				</TableHead>
				<TableBody>
					<TableRow>
						<TableCell>Type 1</TableCell>
						<TableCell>1</TableCell>
						<TableCell as="th" scope="row">
							FileName1.png
						</TableCell>
						<TableCell>
							<TextLink aria-describedby="FileName1.png" href="#">
								Remove
							</TextLink>
						</TableCell>
					</TableRow>
				</TableBody>
			</Table>
		</TableWrapper>
		<ButtonGroup>
			<Button variant="secondary" size="sm" iconBefore={PlusIcon}>
				Upload file
			</Button>
		</ButtonGroup>
	</Stack>
</Stack>
```

If a required file is not uploaded before the page is submitted, show an error in the row where the file is missing and provide a section alert above the table to assist with error correction.

## Upload a defined list of files to a data table

A specific or defined list of files can be uploaded several ways. The number of items on the list and number of files for each list item will determine the appropriate pattern to use.

> The upload defined list of files pattern reduces the amount of form content on the parent page making it easier for users to complete the form, and keeps the users context and focus when providing all required metadata in the side drawer or subpage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upload defined list of files pattern reduces the amount of form content on the parent page, making it easier for users to complete the form and keeps the user’s context and focus when providing all required metadata in the side drawer or subpage.
```

### Empty state

> Before any files are uploaded provide an empty state. We prefer using a standard empty state rather than an empty table because the experience of the empty state will be better for screen reader users. They will not need to navigate through a table to find out it is empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before any files are uploaded, provide an empty state. Use a standard empty state rather than an empty table because the experience of the empty state is simpler for many users. Screen reader users will not need to navigate through a table to find out it is empty.
```

```jsx live
<Stack gap={3}>
	<Stack gap={1.5}>
		<H1>Upload defined list of files to data table</H1>
	</Stack>
	<Stack gap={2} alignItems="flex-start">
		<H2>List of equipment</H2>
		<Stack gap={1}>
			<InfoIcon size="lg" />
			<Heading type="h2" fontSize="lg">
				No equipment added
			</Heading>
			<Text>You must add an equipment to proceed.</Text>
		</Stack>
		<ButtonGroup>
			<Button variant="secondary" size="sm" iconBefore={PlusIcon}>
				Upload file
			</Button>
		</ButtonGroup>
	</Stack>
</Stack>
```

### Large lists

> When large defined lists of files in tables are required a drawer or subpage for each upload action should be used. The File Upload component can be used in the side drawer or subpage to allow multiple files for each required category to listed and uploaded to a table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When large, defined lists of files in tables are required, a drawer or subpage for each upload action should be used. The [file upload](/components/file-upload) component can be used in the side drawer or subpage to allow multiple files for each required category to be upload and added to a table.
```

### File categorisation

> The use of a subpage or drawer enables you to insert questions and fields specific to each file upload to define the category and provide any additional information or metadata related to an upload. Radio groups or Selects can be used to help the user determine which category should be applied to an uploaded file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use of a subpage or drawer enables you to insert questions and fields specific to each file upload to define the record category or type, and provide any additional information related to an upload. Radio groups or selects can be used to help the user determine which category should be applied to an uploaded file.
```

Reviewer 2: this is good but Im worried that designers and the business both use the term metadata

Reviewer: I was consolidating it with the other one. metadata instead of additional information works, too

<ImageWithBorder

> 	alt="Screenshot of an open side drawer with the title ‘Add record’ and an empty state short form with a Select, File upload and form buttons ‘Add record’ and ‘Cancel’"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	alt="Screenshot of an open side drawer with the title ‘Add record’ and an empty state short form with a select, file upload and form buttons: ‘Add record’ and ‘Cancel’."
```

	src="/img/patterns/crud-tables-upload-defined-list.png"
/>

### Validation and focus

> When a file is added in a subpage or drawer, return the user to the parent form page, set their focus on a section alert to inform them if the upload was successful or an error has occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a file is added in a subpage or drawer, return the user to the parent page and set their focus on a section alert to inform them if the upload was successful or an error has occurred.
```

Reviewer 2: good

> The uploaded file should also be visible in a table or list on the parent page. Provide an edit or remove action in the table row or list to enable files to be changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The uploaded file should be visible in a table or list on the parent page. Provide an edit or remove action in the table row or list to enable the files to be changed.
```

Reviewer 2: good

### Update a record in a data table

Provide an ‘Edit’ link or button in the last column of the table so users can open and update or edit existing records. If more than two actions can be performed on a record, put them within an ‘Actions’ [dropdown menu](/components/dropdown-menu) instead.

When a user activates the ‘Edit’ action, open a side drawer or side page containing all of the pre-filled form inputs and controls necessary to edit the record. We do not endorse editing content in-place within tables, as form inputs within table cells compromise accessibility and are difficult for some users.

> After the record is edited in the side page or drawer, return the user to the table page with the updated record showing in table, and provide a section alert immediately above the table to show success. Focus the section alert so the change is announced to screen reader users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the record is edited in the side page or drawer, return the user to the table page with the updated record showing in the table. Provide a section alert immediately above the table to show success and focus it to announce the change to screen reader users.
```
